Okay, we're on.
I wouldn't mind.
If there were some kind of commissions to serve one, and they wanted somebody who would call them as they see them, I wouldn't mind doing that.
But I guess it's not there.
I've done it, as you know, with the environmental commission.
But the rest of it is not there.
There may be points where it is of interest, but my 24-hour life
23 hours and 59 minutes, which is much better off today than it was before.
One last introspective quote on what the whole experience has done for your worldview, your view of life, of everything, just what you've been through, if you can give us the benefit of your experience.
That's an open-ended question for contemplation, I guess.
Well, I guess more than anything else, I end up feeling a great responsibility to keep the generations.
And in the sense of, you know, we're all on this earth for a short period of time.
You know, I'm lucky.
I've not been, you know, more than five years.
And, you know, for some people who find out they have cancer, they don't last six months.
So it's all temporary.
And there will be others that follow.
And I guess the question is whether the time that we have here was really a trusteeship that was respected.
And I think there's a real question about whether we're doing that in terms of energy issues, environmental issues, and economic issues.
I don't think we are.
I think the president's made great progress.
Fortunately, our arms control, Gorbachev, I think, is really a marvelous addition to the world's themes.
But it bothers me on things like, for example, energy issues when people are willing to close on nuclear power plants, which will force us to use up false refuges, which will then not be available for a future generation.
And they don't care because they're all concerned about being anti-mental air.
There's good politics in that.
That kind of thing, which I used to accept before, as I understand politics as well, political, really bothers me now.
It really gets to me in a way that was not the case before.
It's just politics generally where people take positions that in the long run hurt the country, because it is good politics.
Is there anything you would like to have accomplished that remains unfinished, that kind of frustrates you a little bit?
In the political arena.
In the political arena?
I guess everything took a back seat.
There must have been something that you'd like to have worked on, seen to its completion.
I think your pause speaks volumes, too.
Well, what is the Boston Garden?
I'm talking nationally.
I'm talking about from the Senate.
You were going to run for one more term, and you did hope for a new definition of liberalism, and you certainly had expressed your intention to lead the charge for this new definition.
I wonder, apparently it hasn't happened.
Does this frustrate you in any way?
Well, yeah, it does frustrate me, because I think in the long run we're not winning because of it.
But, you know, I wrote the book.
I don't know what more I could have done, even if I had not written the book, then perhaps.
But I wrote the book, and most of the positions in the book I feel exactly the same way as us today, and hopefully we'll move.
Obviously, Michael is much more that kind of politician than Walter Mondale was, and I feel very positive about that.
could I have done that I did not do?
Well, I think about regrets in life.
I think about spending four years at Dartmouth as a swimmer, not learning anything, not taking out the classics.
But you were a good swimmer, though.
I was a good swimmer, yeah.
Not knowing how to play the piano well.
That's where my regrets come in, not so.
Okay.
Just one other question, if that's okay.
I just wondered, you mentioned
that you've had an experience that not many people come through as you have so splendidly.
Did you draw on some inner spirit that you didn't even realize was there, or was it just, damn it, I'm not going to let this thing beat me?
I just wonder what you drew on.
Of course, you have a wonderful wife and three children, and I imagine that's enough inspiration for any young man faced with that kind of a... Well, obviously, you don't appreciate what a wellspring your family is,
When you're out there, the U.S.
Senate, and everybody's throwing garlands at you, and you get a very swell head about them.
But ultimately, when the chips are down, if you don't have people close to you that care about you, you're really in a tough situation.
And secondly, however you are on the religious field, you are more religious
after something and when you go through it.
If you don't believe that there's something beyond this, you really are weak inside.
You don't have the same strength.
Recognizing that you need a spirituality from someplace,
It's very humbling, but in many respects you end up much more appreciative of things and more, not humble, but more recognizing your dependence on things.
Being a public figure, and still a public figure, you certainly, I'm sure, have provided inspiration for many others.
Do you hear from people about the example you set?
I do a lot of talking.
I wrote a second book on the experience, which is sort of passed around.
And I talk to a lot of people who are about to go through the bone marrow transplant.
Since I'm next to President Reagan and Nancy Reagan, one of the more known cancer patients, people who have it come up and just want to talk about it.
Is there a sense of brotherhood, I wonder?
You know, these are my army buddies.
People who go through similar traumatic experiences are always close to whatever that experience happens to be.
And cancer has always been the kind of thing.
I've had a lot of people come up to me and say, the only people who know I had cancer was my husband, my doctor, and my sister.
You're the only one I've told.
Now that's changing, people are more willing to talk about it.
For a long time, it's sort of like almost a family secret they have to be kept.
I guess we've got to wrap it up.
So you're a more religious person today?
What?
Are you a more religious person today?
How did the Orthodox Church influence you?
Or you're as Catholicism.
Well, this is going to... You want the truth?
Yes.
What we found when we were going through all this was that first of all, believing God is not a function of one religion or another.
You either believe it or you don't.
And as we found the need to be more
involved with church and religion, which obviously means the children have to be part of it.
That's when we ran into this dilemma of my church versus my wife's church.
And it just got to the point where it was not, you know, if you were talking Washington now, the churches, that getting the kids to go to the Greek churches is very difficult.
Whereas the Episcopal Church, they're both in our neighborhood, was very comfortable for them.
They saw women acolytes and women priests and that kind of thing.
And we just got to the point where we decided, look, we want them to have a religious experience and we're going to go with this the least agony over the process of going to church.
And so my children are Episcopalians.
I mean, they're Greek Orthodoxes and
They were baptized.
Baptizing the Greek Orthodox, and I hope they will always be Greek Orthodox, but they're accolades in the Episcopal Church and feel like they're part of it.
It really bothers me because I think there's such an inherent advantage of an ethnic identity, and to have it lost, which I think is what will happen eventually, because of doctrinal reasons.
I know this is very controversial, but I just think at some point there's going to have to be some looking at the consequences.
What do you suggest?
What do you look for?
Well, I just think that the Greek Church is going to have to look at the United States as different from Greece, because in Greece, Greeks marry Greeks.
You don't run into this dilemma.
In the United States, Greek, I don't know what the ratio is.
Oh, it's unbelievable.
75%.
Nary no agree.
Interfaith marriages.
Oh, I have to say, my own guess is probably higher than that.
No, it's an official, because I happen to be a theologian, so I... Anyway, in fact, it says interfaith marriages.
It's an orthodox marriage, a non-orthodox, Roman Catholic, and whatever.
Do you worship in the Orthodox Church, though?
Well, I mean, I go to the church that my family goes to.
I consider myself Greek Orthodox.
I don't consider myself at all Episcopalian.
But I go to their church.
I participate in the church.
I'm a member of the church.
I'm on the board.
Because that's where, if I were to die tomorrow,
I know that they will continue their religious experience.
Whereas if we were going to the Greek church and I would have died tomorrow, because it doesn't ring in them, particularly as young women, then the fear was they would have nothing.
Quickly, how old are the kids now, by the way?
7, 11, and 14.
And I just think at some point the hierarchy in Greece
is going to have to think about whether a viable church... I think the growth potential is enormous.
Because I think in a mixed marriage, the Greek ethnicity is generally stronger than the ethnicity on the other side.
So it's a natural advantage.
I think it's dissipated by... If I had all boys, maybe it would be different.
But I think particularly having daughters who feel strongly about equality and that they have as much right as boys to everything, to be in a religious experience with their, you know, they don't have what they could have in another church, you're at a severe disadvantage.
And my kids, who I would prefer to have been Greek Orthodox, are going to be Episcopalians.
And I think they...
I respect that, but if they're going to lose their ethnicity in part because of that, I think that's a negative.
Does the fact that your children are Episcopalians bother you, Mr. John?
It bothers me because I think I am enriched by being Greek.
What did you do to prevent this switch over to Episcopalians?
Well, I didn't do anything.
I didn't think it was my role to prevent.
I think he tried to create a situation, and we did.
We tried to go to the Greek church down there in the crisis, but it didn't work, and our needs at that point were met by the other church.
Be more specific.
What do you mean?
You mean no one came to visit you?
No one came to give you comfort from the Greek Orthodox Church?
No, no, nobody came because we went all that time without anybody knowing.
But in terms of a family seeking out a religious experience in which three of the people in the church, one is Episcopalian, one is the Greek Orthodox, but three women, young women, and they look at two churches.
One church is in a language that they don't understand.
One is the language they do.
And one frankly offers them more.
It's like being a free agent.
It's who you're going to sign with, right?
And one church says if you're a woman, there are some things you cannot be.
That's what I mean by that statement, by the way.
Let's say that your children tomorrow decide to become Muslim, or Hindus, or Jehovah Witnesses.
Will you allow them to become?
Will you go along with them?
Will you go to the... In this country with women today, you don't allow or disallow.
They do what they want.
And if you have any brain, you create a situation that encourages them to move.
If I ever said to one of my daughters, you cannot be X, they will be X more so.
I would suggest that you don't get in front of the window.
I don't know your camera, but I just have enough experience with these.
Thank you.
Why don't you take a picture of me in the center.
Sure I will.
A couple of little old guys.
It's doing very well.
Now, just when that little light goes on.
Can you focus with this?
Yes, I will.
Why don't you let me focus?
If it's all right, I can bounce it off the ceiling.
Stand right where I'm standing right now.
Okay, thanks.
Thank you.
Do you mind if my piece will be running after the election?
Would you mind if I give you a call after that?
I think I probably need your phone number.
Here is 508... Let me make sure my machine is off.